# Text is Everywhere

Text is **ubiquitous**.

From the start of the day until day's end, we're continually presented with text in the world around
us.

And while the _physical_ world is filled with an abundance of text, its volume is
nothing compared to the amount of text in the _digital_ world -- and digital text is growing
_rapidly_.

There's **huge potential** wrapped up in all this text -- in the right context it
could provide important, valuable information.  The challenge lies in **finding the right
text** to fit a given context, and **extracting useful information** from it.

This blog is an ongoing discussion around **working with text**.  There is a
huge variety of goals and related tasks behind this.  Some are simple.  Some seem simple, but really
aren't.  And some are just plain difficult.  We'll cover ground in all three areas.  Along the way,
we'll spend time discussing low level, technical details.  Other times, we'll focus on higher level,
conceptual topics.  Some examples of ground we'll cover include:

* What is Unicode?
* How is a negative lookahead used when performing a regular expression match?
* What is an inverted index and how is it used?
* What is Elasticsearch? What's Apache Lucene?  How are the two related?
* What are n-grams?  How  can they be used in performing full-text search?
* What is sentiment analysis, and why is it difficult?
* What is word sense disambiguation, and what approaches are available for supporting it?

From a navigational standpoint, we'll start conceptually in the 'middle', and work our way out to
both lower level and higher level concepts.  We'll start off by using a specific technology
(Elasticsearch), and the various capabilities it supports, as our 'map' and 'guide' through the
early parts of the terrain.  We'll branch off into other areas as the need arises, continually
working our way back to the main trail.

In the **next post**, we'll learn a bit about what Elasticsearch is, and what it has to
offer.

I hope you can stick around and join me...
