# Bulking Up

In our [last post](http://www.textualdevelopment.com/2015/06/11/you-get-what-you-give/), we learned
how to retrieve a document from Elasticsearch by id.  Most of our Elasticsearch use cases will focus
on _searching_ for documents matching some _criteria_ rather than retrieving them by id.  In our
next post we'll start looking at search, but before doing that we'll need a collection of documents
indexed in Elasticsearch that we can search against.  In this post, we'll look at using the
Elasticsearch Bulk API to efficiently index a large number of documents.



## Bulk REST API

The Elasticsearch bulk API lets us perform multiple actions against documents within a single request.

A bulk _indexing_ request has the following characteristics:

* It consists of an HTTP POST against the `_bulk` REST endpoint.
* The payload of the POST contains one or more instructions for what we'd like indexed.
* Each instruction consists of two lines describing the indexing action to take for a given document:
	* The first line is the action and metadata specification for the request.
	* The second line is the actual source JSON document that we're indexing.

As an example, if we wanted to index the first three
[albums](http://www.textualdevelopment.com/2015/06/04/an-index-on-our-progress/#nest)
(500 through 498) from Rolling Stone's
[500 Greates Albums of All Time](http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/500-greatest-albums-of-all-time-20120531),
we'd use the following request:

```json
POST /_bulk
{ "index": { "_index": "rolling-stone-500", "_type": "album", "_id": "500" } }
{"title": "Aquemini", "artist": "Outkast", ... }
{ "index": { "_index": "rolling-stone-500", "_type": "album", "_id": "499" } }
{"title": "Live in Cook County Jail", "artist": "B. B. King", ... }
{ "index": { "_index": "rolling-stone-500", "_type": "album", "_id": "498" } }
{"title": "The Stone Roses", "artist": "The Stone Roses", ... }
```

Let's take a closer look at the first line of the first indexing
instruction within the request above:

```json
{ "index": { "_index": "rolling-stone-500", "_type": "album", "_id": "500" } }
```

We see the following:

* The top level JSON field, `index`, indicates that this is an indexing instruction.
	* Although we won't cover them in this post, the bulk API also supports `create`, `update`, and `delete` actions.
* The body of the `index` field contains metadata about how to index the document:
	* `_index` indicates that we want the document indexed in the _rolling-stone-500_ index.
	* `_type` indicates that we want the document indexed under the _album_ type.
	* `_id` indicates the document id should be set to _500_.

The second line of the indexing instruction is the full JSON _source_ of the document we're
indexing.  This is similar in structure to the JSON documents we indexed individually in a previous
post, but with one important change:  The bulk API requires that each source JSON document be 
included in the POST body as a single line (with no unescaped newlines.)

After making the above request, we get the following response back:

```json
{
   "took": 82,
   "errors": false,
   "items": [
      {
         "index": {
            "_index": "rolling-stone-500",
            "_type": "album",
            "_id": "500",
            "_version": 1,
            "status": 201
         }
      },
      {
         "index": {
            "_index": "rolling-stone-500",
            "_type": "album",
            "_id": "499",
            "_version": 1,
            "status": 201
         }
      },
      {
         "index": {
            "_index": "rolling-stone-500",
            "_type": "album",
            "_id": "498",
            "_version": 1,
            "status": 201
         }
      }
   ]
}
```

In the response above, we see that no errors were generated (via the
_errors_ field).  We're also able to see some details about each of
the indexed documents.  Of particular note is the _status_ value -- in
this case, the value of _201_ indicating that each document was
created as part of this request.


Let's make a request that will generate an error, to see what we get
back.  If we've already indexed a document where the `year` field was
interpreted by Elasticsearch as an integer, indexing another document
with a value in `year` that can't be parsed as an integer will
generate an error:

```json
POST /_bulk
{ "index": { "_index": "rolling-stone-500", "_type": "album", "_id": "499"}}
{ ...  "year": "not an integer" ... }
```

This will generate the following response:

```json
{
   "took": 35,
   "errors": true,
   "items": [
      {
         "index": {
            "_index": "rolling-stone-500",
            "_type": "album",
            "_id": "499",
            "status": 400,
            "error": "MapperParsingException[failed to parse [year]]; nested: NumberFormatException[For input string: \"not an integer\"]; "
         }
      }
   ]
}
```

You'll notice that:

* The `errors` field is now set to _true_.
* The `status` value of the item is set to `400` rather than `201`
* There is a new `error` field on the item, containing some details about the error generated.

One of the nice things about the bulk API is that it will index the documents that it _can_, while
handling any individual document failures and providing information (as seen above) as to which
documents succeeded and failed, and why.

### Index and Type Shorthand

If _all_ the documents within our bulk request fall under the same index and type, we can take a
'shorthand' approach by including the index and type in the request URL.  By doing this, we make
these the default index and type used in each of the indexing instructions, allowing us to leave
those values out of each individual instruction:

```json
POST /rolling-stone-500/album/_bulk
{ "index": { "_id": "500" } }
{"title": "Aquemini", "artist": "Outkast", ... }
{ "index": { "_id": "499" } }
{"title": "Live in Cook County Jail", "artist": "B. B. King", ... }
{ "index": { "_id": "498" } }
{"title": "The Stone Roses", "artist": "The Stone Roses", ... }
```

### Rolling Stone 500 - Bulk Script

In upcoming posts, we'll start looking at different techniques for
searching for documents in Elasticsearch.  In preparation for that,
we'll need to index a corpus of documents to search against.  In
keeping with the running example we've been using so far, the corpus
we'll use will consist of all albums from the Rolling Stone 500
listing.

Here's a gist you can use to index all 500 albums into a
`rolling-stone-500` Elasticsearch index:
[Rolling Stone 500 - Elasticsearch Bulk Load Script](https://gist.github.com/rickhaffey/69c18545d6effe03f3e5#file-rolling-stone-500-es-bulk-load)

## NEST

To perform bulk indexing using NEST, we'll make calls against the
`Bulk` method exposed on the NEST client.

Let's assume that the first three albums we want to index out of the
Rolling Stone 500 are structured as follows:

```cs
Album a500 = new Album { 
	Title = "Aquemini", 
	Artist = "OutKast",
	Rank = 500,
	//...					
};
Album a499 = new Album {
	Title = "Live in Cook County Jail", 
	Artist = "B. B. King",
	Rank = 499,
	//...					
};
Album a498 = new Album {
	Title = "The Stone Roses",
	Artist = "The Stone Roses",
	Rank = 498,
	//...					
};
```

The `Bulk` function takes a single `bulkSelector` parameter of type
`Func<BulkDescriptor, BulkDescriptor>`.  This parameter allows us to
chain multiple bulk action instructions within the overall bulk
request.  One of the methods exposed on `BulkDescriptor` is the
`Index` method.  (Even though we're not looking at them as part of
this post, keep in mind that the bulk operation supports _create_,
_update_, and _delete_ operations in addition to _index_.
`BulkDescriptor` exposes methods corresponding to each of these
actions as well.)

`Index` takes a single `bulkIndexSelector` parameter that's of type
`Func<BulkIndexDescriptor<T>, BulkIndexDescriptor<T>>`.  This
parameter gives us a means of providing the details for each of the
bulk index instructions within our request:

```cs
IBulkResponse response = client.Bulk(br => br
    .Index<Album>(bid => bid
        .Index("rolling-stone-500")
        .Id(a500.Rank)
        .Document(a500)
	    )
    .Index<Album>(bid => bid
        .Index("rolling-stone-500")
        .Id(a499.Rank)
        .Document(a499)
		)
    .Index<Album>(bid => bid
        .Index("rolling-stone-500")
        .Id(a498.Rank)
        .Document(a498)
		)
    // ... etc ...
```

The response we get back from this call implements the `IBulkResponse`
interface.  This interface exposes the following:

* An `Errors` boolean property, indicating whether or not any errors
were generated as part of the bulk operation.
* Both an `Items` and an `ItemsWithErrors` property, each of type
`IEnumerable<BulkOperationResponseItem>`.  `Items` contains details
about each document included in the bulk request.  `ItemsWithErrors`
only contains the wdocuments that generated some type of error during the
indexing attempt.

We can inspect the response as follows:

```cs
Console.WriteLine("Errors: {0}", response.Errors);

Console.WriteLine("ItemsWithErrors:");
foreach (BulkOperationResponseItem item in response.ItemsWithErrors) {
	Console.WriteLine("\tIndex: {0}, Type: {1}, Id: {2}, Error: {3}",
		item.Index, item.Type, item.Id, item.Error);
}
```

If we include a document that generates an error within our request,
we would see the following output:

```
TODO
```

If all our documents are going to be added to the same index, we can
use a shortcut to avoid having to specify the index names as part of
each `BulkIndexDescriptor`.  When setting up the `ConnectionSettings`
of our client, we can use the `SetDefaultIndex` method to specify an
index to use as our default if one isn't called out specifically as
part of each individual call.  (Note: Setting this value applies the
default index to all requests against the client, not just bulk
requests.)

```cs
config.SetDefaultIndex("rolling-stone-500");
```

After this call, we can simplify our bulk requests as follows:

```cs
IBulkResponse response = client.Bulk(br => br
	.Index<Album>(bid => bid
		.Id(a500.Rank)
		.Document(a500)
	)
	.Index<Album>(bid => bid
		.Id(a499.Rank)
		.Document(a499)
	)
	.Index<Album>(bid => bid
		.Id(a498.Rank)
		.Document(a498)
	)
	// ... etc ...
);
```

Finally, if the documents we want to bulk index are contained in some
type of enumerable collection, there's another approach we can take
that works nicely when iterating through the collection.

The `Bulk` function has an overload that accepts an object
implementing the `IBulkRequest` interface.  `BulkDescriptor` is one
type that implements this interface, so we can instantiate one of
those, apply all the documents in our collection to that bulk
descriptor, then pass that to the `Bulk` method to index our
documents:

```cs
List<Album> albums = ...
	
var bulkDescriptor = new BulkDescriptor ();

foreach (var album in albums) {
	bulkDescriptor.Index<Album>(bid => bid
        .Id(album.Rank)
        .Document(album)
	);
}

var result = client.Bulk(bulkDescriptor);
```

## Summary

In this post, we looked at different approaches for bulk indexing
documents, both via the REST API, as well as through the NEST client.
In the next post, we'll take our first stab at actually _searching_
for documents within Elasticsearch.
