# The Terms of the Agreement

In our [last post]() we loaded an index with a good sample of
documents that we can use to start looking at search.  In this post,
we'll take a look at one of the basic search techniques within
Elasticsearch: performing a term query.

## Term Query

Let's imagine that we want to search for all albums in our
_rolling-stone-500_ index that contain the word _guitar_ in the
album's _summary_.  To do that, we could execute a **term query**:

```json
POST /rolling-stone-500/album/_search
{
  "query": {
    "term": {
	  "summary": "guitar"
	}
  }
}
```

Let's break down this request:

* Because we'll need to send the details of our query in the request body, we use and HTTP _POST_.
	* Note: The Elasticsearch REST API allows making this exact same request with an HTTP _GET_, but I prefer
	  to follow the HTTP standard more closely, and use _POST_ when including a request body. 
* The first two segments of the URL specify the index (_rolling-stone-500_) and type (_album_) that are the focus of our query.
* The last segment of the URL (__search_) indicates that we're making this request against the search _endpoint_.
	* This will be present in _all_ our searches.
* The top level field of our request body JSON, _query_, contains all the details about how we want the query performed.
* The _term_ subfield indicates that we want this to be performed as a term query.
* The _summary_ subfield indicates that we want to search for the term in the _summary_ field of our documents, and we want to search for the value _guitar_.


## NEST


## Issues

* score not needed at this point (yes/no, not ranking)
* multiple terms
* misses words that _contain_ 'guitar': guitars, guitarists

## Summary

